<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!-- This file is part of the DITA Open Toolkit project hosted on 
  Sourceforge.net. See the accompanying license.txt file for 
  applicable licenses.-->
<!-- (c) Copyright IBM Corp. 2004, 2005 All Rights Reserved. -->

<!DOCTYPE concept PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Concept//EN" "../../dtd/concept.dtd">
<concept id="bookmap-readme" xml:lang="en-us">
  <title>Bookmap Readme</title>
  <prolog/>
  <conbody>
    <p>This demonstration provides a proof-of-concept implementation of the DITA bookmap proposal. The proposal adds book output to DITA using a specialized DITA map known as a bookmap. The bookmap organizes the DITA topics with the correct nesting and sequence for the book. In addition, the bookmap assigns roles such as preface, chapter, and appendix to top-level topics within the book. </p>
    <p class="- topic/p ">For more detailed information about the proposal, see the detailed posting on the DITA forum at <xref href="news://news.software.ibm.com:119/c11fd3$85qq$2@news.boulder.ibm.com" format="news">news://news.software.ibm.com:119/c11fd3$85qq$2@news.boulder.ibm.com</xref>.</p>
    <note>This demonstration has the following limitations:<ul>
        <li>For XSL-FO formatting and thus PDF generation, only the basics have been implemented. Through specialization, the DITA XHTML-based outputs for DITA map are also available for bookmap.</li>
        <li>The design for the book info component of the proposal has been fleshed out based on antecedents in DocBook and IBMIDDoc (see the comments in the <codeph>bookinfo.mod</codeph> file). Most of the elements in bookinfo aren&apos;t processed.</li>
        <li>The book list component of the proposal hasn&apos;t been implemented yet. Possible designs for a glossary list have been discussed extensively on the DITA forum (resulting in the proposal posted as <xref href="news://news.software.ibm.com:119/3FA29F54.83AFB251@ca.ibm.com" format="news">news://news.software.ibm.com:119/blfg38$5k0q$1@news.boulder.ibm.com</xref>).</li>
        <li>The book style component of the proposal is much more experimental than the bookmap and bookinfo components. Processing for this component is limited.</li>
      </ul></note>
  </conbody>
</concept>

