<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!-- This file is part of the DITA Open Toolkit project hosted on 
    Sourceforge.net. See the accompanying license.txt file for 
    applicable licenses.-->
<!-- (c) Copyright IBM Corp. 2007 All Rights Reserved. -->
<!DOCTYPE concept PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Concept//EN" "concept.dtd">
<concept id="notices" xml:lang="en-us">
<title>Notice</title>
<shortdesc>This information was developed for products and services offered in the U.S.A.</shortdesc>
<conbody>
<p>This product is meant for educational purposes only.
Some of the trademarks mentioned in this product appear for identification purposes only.
Not responsible for direct, indirect, incidental or consequential damages resulting from any defect, error or failure to perform.
Any resemblance to real persons, living or dead is purely coincidental.
Void where prohibited.
Some assembly required.
Batteries not included.
Use only as directed.
Do not use while operating a motor vehicle or heavy equipment.
Do not fold, spindle or mutilate.
Do not stamp.
No user-serviceable parts inside.
Subject to change without notice.
Drop in any mailbox.
No postage necessary if mailed in the United States.
Postage will be paid by addressee.
Post office will not deliver without postage.
Some equipment shown is optional.
Objects in mirror may be closer than they appear.
Not recommended for children.
Your mileage may vary.
</p>
<p>No other warranty expressed or implied.
This supersedes all previous notices.</p>
<section><title> COPYRIGHT LICENSE:</title><p>This information contains sample application programs in source language, which illustrate programming techniques on various operating platforms. You may copy, modify, and distribute these sample programs in any form without payment to IBM, for the purposes of developing, using, marketing or distributing application programs conforming to the application programming interface for the operating platform for which the sample programs are written. These examples have not been thoroughly tested under all conditions. Retro Tools, therefore, cannot guarantee or imply reliability, serviceability, or function of these programs. </p></section>
</conbody>
</concept>
